(epic music playing)
They've finished scanning
the fifth chamber, sir.
Requesting permission
to proceed.
Nothing yet, huh?
TALLA KEYALI:
Not even a stick figure.
Just a whole lotta empty walls.
Charly's mapping it all, but...
Buried treasure would
be more fun.
Pretty much.
Well, tell them
they're good to keep moving.
Will do.
-What are you doing?
-Hm?
I see you walking
around all the time
with that data pad lately.
You writing a novel?
No, uh...
it's for Anaya.
Anaya?
I've been writing
letters to her.
To Krill? How the hell are you
getting through?
Well, I don't actually
send them.
I just figured that...
someday, if I do see her again,
they might be something
she'd wanna read.
Since I'm missing her life now,
she can go back in time
and feel like I was there.
You know...
after all these years,
you're still able
to surprise me.
CHARLY BURKE:
Commander!
We've found something!
You've mapped all this, right?
I'd hate to get lost.
Just follow the bread crumbs,
you'll be fine, sir.
Lieutenant, what have you got?
Captain. We have detected
a large chamber
beyond this wall.
Based on Ensign Burke's
cartographic index
of the chambers we have
discovered thus far,
it is possible we have found
the primary burial vault.
Can we get inside?
Hemblicite tombs
are notorious for booby traps.
According to our scans,
this thing is rigged
to kill anyone who
tries to open it.
Well, so how do we breach it?
ISAAC: I would suggest you
step back against the far wall.
(stone rumbling)
(projectiles pinging)
It is now safe to proceed.
(clangs)
You, uh, got
a little something right there.
(rocks clattering)
Jackpot.
(dramatic music swelling)
Scan is complete. Uploading data
for carbon analysis.
ISAAC:
Acknowledged.
How old is this stuff?
The oldest artifacts date back
around 70,000 years.
My God. When did they die out?
The Hemblicite Empire
fell about 50,000 years ago.
They were kinda similar
to the ancient Egyptians.
They used to bury their kings
with all kinds of
tools and jewelry and things
that they could use
in the afterlife.
Lucky for us.
Man, you said archaeology
was a hobby.
You sound like an expert.
It's interesting stuff.
I don't do anything half-assed,
Lieutenant.
I can see that. What's
this thing?
It's called a jiktal.
It's a razor for
facial grooming.
You still have to shave
in the afterlife? That sucks.
Well, this is all
undeniably fascinating,
but I'm at the end of
a 12-hour shift,
so, if you're good here,
I'm gonna take off.
No problem,
we'll see you in the morning.
Return fire!
Sir, the Kaylon have disabled
our forward targeting scanners!
Implement source redirect
from the navigational array!
(explosions, sparking)
Fire all torpedoes!
Evasive maneuvers! Hard to port!
Kaylon are countering!
Deflectors are gone!
Divert power from
life support!
(alert chiming)
(roars)
(circuits crackling)
(door chimes)
End simulation.
Come in.
-Commander.
-Topa.
Am I interrupting?
No. I have exceeded
my allotted time.
I apologize.
It's all good, no big deal.
Were you running the
command program?
Yes.
Is that not permitted?
No, it's fine,
there are no restrictions.
You just... don't usually see
people your age using it.
I have yet to master
its intricacies.
Well, it's not easy,
that's the whole point.
How far have you gotten?
The Kaylon destroy my ship
seven minutes into the
battle every time.
Believe it or not, that's a
long time for a beginner.
Is this just for fun?
I was thinking
that when I am old enough...
Commander, I am interested
in taking
the Union Point entrance
examination.
You are?
Topa, that's great.
Have you told Bortus?
Yes. He has given
his blessing,
but he has warned me
of the difficulty involved.
It's a mountain to
climb for sure,
but the fact that you're
challenging yourself like this
shows the right initiative.
If you're serious about it,
and you want to get
an early start,
I'd be happy to give
you some guidance.
That is very kind
of you, Commander.
How about we find a couple of
days this coming week,
and as long as it's all
general clearance,
you can shadow me,
get a sense of what
service entails.
I would be very grateful.
Okay, we'll set it up.
Thank you, Commander.
(door opens)
(closes)
(theme song playing)
-(door chimes)
-Come in.
Topa. You're early.
I apologize, Commander.
No, don't apologize,
it's fine.
We can get a jump on the day.
Come on, let's go.
First up on the schedule:
daily rounds.
They can be kind of boring,
but a vessel this size
has a lot of moving parts.
Someone needs to make sure
that the ship's left hand
knows what the right
hand is doing.
That includes things like
power allocation requests,
status updates,
and most importantly,
basic morale.
They like to know you're
paying attention.
Good morning, Commander.
Good morning, Lieutenant.
Also, with so many
different species
working on the same ship,
the occasional culture clash
is inevitable,
and all those headaches fall
under the purview of
the First Officer.
All right, thanks.
Commander. Thanks for coming by.
No problem, Biggins,
what's up?
That.
Oh. Yeah.
Yeah, I've never worked
with a Belkarian officer,
but Commander Keyali told us
to be prepared.
Well, we wouldn't be the first
to have to navigate it.
Did you talk to him?
He insists he's within
his rights.
(sighs)
Hey. Lieutenant Bolobar?
Ensign Bolobar, sir.
Ensign, right.
I couldn't remember
without the, uh... shoulders.
Which is a good segue, actually.
I'm gonna have to ask you
to put on a uniform.
In the Belkarian faith,
to wear clothing
on the first day of the month,
is considered an affront
to the work of the Spirit Lord.
I have explained this
to Lieutenant Biggins.
Yeah, I heard.
Ensign, you must know a uniform
is a basic requirement
for service in the fleet.
What about Lieutenant Unk
in engineering?
He does not wear a uniform.
Unk is half the size
of a shuttlecraft.
He'd have to wear a tent.
The Union is supposed
to respect
all cultural traditions.
True, but that
works both ways.
Look, I don't want to disrespect
your religion,
but maybe there's a
sensible compromise
between your faith
and Union protocol,
that would satisfy
everyone involved.
What do you suggest?
Put some pants on,
and we'll call it a day.
Very well, Commander.
Hey, Commander, sir.
Top of the morning.
Hi, Yaphit.
Commander, I'm glad
you're here.
We're gonna need clearance
for an extra 15%
power allocation
to purge the neutron filters
in the dysonium matrix
this afternoon.
No problem.
By the way, hope you don't mind,
Topa's shadowing me
for a couple days.
Little pre-prep for the
Union Point entrance exam.
Ah, for real?
Wow, Topa, that's really cool.
(speaking alien language)
I believe I would like to do
what Commander Grayson does.
I haven't told him how much
day drinking that requires.
(laughs) Good one, Commander.
Hey, I just want you to know
we always enjoy your
visits down here.
Thanks, Yaphit.
Just for your own education,
that's called ass kissing.
"Ass kissing."
Will it be on the entrance exam?
(laughs) No, it won't be.
I know a lot of this
seems pretty dull,
but Union service is
as much about mundane busy work
as it is about adventure.
No, it is not dull.
I want to know everything.
Yeah, you say that now...
If I can ask, Commander,
why did you choose
to join the Fleet?
I was always someone who was
comfortable with responsibility.
I was usually the one
who volunteered
to watch the younger kids
on a field trip,
or captain the soccer team.
And I liked the satisfaction
of helping other people succeed
at their jobs.
I knew a command position
in the Fleet
would mean a long,
slow climb through a system,
but I also knew it
would be worth it.
What about you? Why do
you want to join?
Ever since I was
a young child,
I have always felt...
incomplete.
As if the person I am
today is a bookmark.
A placeholder, until
I discover who I am.
I have not found the
answer at home,
so perhaps it is out
among the stars.
You've... felt this
way for some time?
I once heard Dr. Finn say that,
"If you wake up in the
middle of the night
"and there is nothing to keep
you from falling asleep again,
it means you are happy."
I think that maybe...
I am not happy.
You don't sleep well?
I always feel as if...
there is something
wrong with me.
But I cannot tell what.
Lieutenant Malloy says many
people my age feel this way.
Perhaps it is normal.
Lieutenant Felina's
doing much better
after the neural regeneration
therapy,
so I'd say it's safe to put her
back on limited duty.
All right, I'll have Kelly
put her back on the roster.
How's Isaac doing?
As far as I can see,
remarkably well.
Ever since the suicide attempt,
the crew's softened a
little toward him.
Power of compassion.
Even Charly?
-(door chimes)
-Come in.
-Hi, Commander.
-Hey.
You guys busy?
No, we were just wrapping up.
What's going on?
What's the latest
with the dig?
Union Central is sending
a science team
to take over the excavation.
Aw, just when it
was getting good.
Yeah. Well, they'll be
here in a week,
so enjoy it while it lasts.
Have either of you...
spent any time talking
to Topa recently?
I haven't, no.
No. What's up?
I'm worried about him.
What's the matter?
I think that, at some point,
possibly soon...
the person he is and
the person he was...
are going to collide
with each other.
Has he said something to you?
In a general sense, yes.
He's struggling, emotionally.
He's confused.
He knows...
He knows there's
something different about him.
Oh, boy.
Why don't you have him
drop by my office?
He and I can have a talk,
and it will allow me
to do a casual evaluation.
It might be a little
early for that.
He confided in me and it's
possible he could see that
as a breach of trust
at this point.
I just...
I need guidance.
When he tells me this stuff,
I feel like a horrible person.
I feel like I'm
lying to him with my silence.
I mean, there are times--
There are times
I want to scream it out loud,
"You were, you were born female.
You were altered without
your knowledge."
And then just...
let him decide for himself
how he wants to handle it.
I think
it may be time to
talk to Bortus.
(deep breath)
-(door chimes)
-Yes?
-Hey, guys.
-Commander.
Please, sit. I don't mean
to interrupt your dinner.
Have you seen Topa?
He is late.
I have him helping
Ensign Burke
with the recalibration
of the navigational array.
Part of his exam prep.
We both appreciate the time
you have spent with him.
It's my pleasure.
Please, join us.
Have some Kolp.
-Uh, is that the--
-It is the green one.
Right.
Listen, I have to confess,
I had a...
I had an ulterior motive
for putting Topa to
work at dinnertime.
There's something I want
to talk to you about.
What is it?
I understand that it's
inappropriate
within your culture
for me to bring this up, but...
have you two ever discussed
telling Topa?
About his origins?
You are correct, Commander.
It is entirely inappropriate!
How dare you enter
our home and--
Klyden!
We have discussed the matter
on several occasions,
and we feel--
We do not feel the
time is right.
And that's your decision,
of course,
you're his parents, but
if I can offer
an outsider's perspective,
I think there may be
some residual damage
that could have had a ripple
effect down through the years.
This kid is unhappy.
All children are unhappy.
He will outgrow it.
I don't want to betray
his confidence
if he hasn't said
anything to you,
but he thinks there's something
wrong with him.
-What?
-He doesn't know.
Look, everyone at this
table is aware
that we're talking about someone
who was surgically altered
without their knowledge
or consent--
Commander, you have overstayed
your welcome.
You may go now.
Please. Talk to your son.
I apologize for disturbing
your evening.
-Klyden.
-No!
She could be correct.
She is a female!
With no understanding
of our culture!
If Topa is struggling--
If he is struggling,
it is insignificant
compared to the struggle
he would face
if he were to learn the truth!
It occurs to me...
that in all the time
we have been together,
I have never once known you
to be uncertain.
Of anything.
Tell me,
what is it like to be so wise?
You are mocking me.
You invite it.
Do you know how much pain
I would have been spared
had I not discovered
that I was born female?
I would never, ever
force our son
to endure such a life!
I love him with all
my heart! Do you?
Of course, I do!
Then listen to me!
Bortus, I would give anything
to be ignorant of my beginnings.
Topa may never be happy...
but unhappiness is better
than despair.
(pensive music playing)
(door chimes)
Come in.
Hey, there you are.
We were scheduled for 1500.
I am sorry, Commander.
Punctuality.
Requirement number one
for a Union officer.
I...
will not be able to continue
the training.
-Why not?
-My father has forbidden it.
He has told me that if
I wish to resume,
I can ask the captain.
But not you.
Topa, I'm...
I'm so sorry.
I have great respect
for the captain.
But it is not the same.
I feel...
a connection with you.
Perhaps you could talk to
my father and change his mind.
I don't know that talking
to Klyden will do any good.
You could try.
Topa...
this hurts me more
than you can possibly imagine,
but you have to believe me
when I tell you
that I am powerless here.
As much as I hate him...
as much as I hate his answer...
he's your father.
I do not want to give up.
If I could someday
be like you...
have a noble purpose,
to inspire people
to become their best selves...
perhaps I would not feel so sad.
(sighs)
(door opens)
Hey there, Topa.
Hello, sir.
Oh, you don't have
to call me "sir"
until you're wearing a uniform.
You wanna see something cool?
We're using a combination
of DNA fragments
embedded in the artifacts,
along with sculptural
renderings,
to reconstruct an approximation
of the Hemblicites' appearance.
Up till now, nobody knew
what they looked like.
But thanks to modern science,
we can make a good guess.
You wanna see?
Pretty amazing, isn't it?
You're looking at a race
that's been dead
for tens of thousands of years.
Please excuse me.
ISAAC:
Hello, Topa.
Isaac...
What is it like? To be dead?
ISAAC: It is the opposite
of being alive.
When you... deactivated
yourself...
what did it feel like?
I was deactivated.
I felt nothing.
Were you...
unhappy when they
brought you back?
ISAAC: I am incapable
of happiness or misery.
May I ask the purpose
of your inquiry?
I was...
just curious.
-(door chimes)
-Come in!
Isaac. Hi.
ISAAC: Hello, Commander.
I apologize for disturbing you.
No, it's fine. What's up?
ISAAC:
It is my understanding
that a visit to a crew
member's quarters
during off-duty hours
can invite speculation
regarding intent.
If you wish,
I will send a ship-wide
communique assuring the crew
that this was not a romantic
or sexual encounter.
I-- I would just not say
anything, it's all good.
What can I do for you?
ISAAC: Topa came to the
astrophysics lab
to speak with me.
He had many questions
regarding my attempt to
deactivate myself.
What kind of questions?
ISAAC: He wished to know
what it was like to be dead.
What else?
ISAAC:
He asked if I was...
unhappy to be revived.
I see...
ISAAC: I am aware
that Union medical protocol
recommends disclosure
of this variety of information
to a superior officer.
It does. Thank you
for telling me.
ISAAC:
Good day, Commander.
(indistinct chatter)
Topa.
Commander.
I should not be speaking to you.
It's okay, we're not
talking about work.
You're still technically
obeying your father.
I just...
wanted to see how
you were doing.
-I am fine.
-Yeah?
Yes.
You know,
if there's ever anything
you needed to talk about...
just as a friend...
I'm here. Always.
Thank you, Commander.
I will be all right.
Sometimes, when
I'm feeling low,
or just a little unsure
of myself...
I have a slice of Kimbok.
Moclan Opsadda cake.
Yeah. Usually makes me feel
a whole lot better.
Perhaps I will
have some later.
There are several different
Kimbok recipes on file.
You should search the database.
I'm sure you can find
one to your liking.
If you look hard enough.
Papa?
Inquiry. Show me "Kimbok."
How many recipe patterns
for Kimbok are on file?
COMPUTER: There are
41 recipe patterns for Kimbok.
They are available
for replication
at all food synthesizers.
Are there any other files
containing
the designation "Kimbok"?
COMPUTER: There is one file.
Designation Kimbok33.
Dated Union Standard 735 2417.
May I see it?
COMPUTER:
The file is password protected.
(sighs)
One piece of Kimbok.
-(monitor chimes)
-COMPUTER: Incoming message.
Access file Kimbok33.
Password Gomaskah 488.
COMPUTER:
Password verified.
(pensive music growing louder)
-CLAIRE: It's your own fault.
-I know that.
I just--
he said he had another
human friend
who could tolerate it.
I've never met a single human
who could eat a Baliddian tart
without some kind
of horrible allergic reaction.
Well, I won't do it again.
For God's sake, you're
a grown man,
you should know better.
It just looked super tasty.
All those little green sprinkles
and whatnot.
Doctor. I need to talk to you.
Sure.
Run this over your face
for three minutes.
What's wrong with him?
He's a child with
no self-control.
How can I help you?
I need to talk to
you about Topa.
And...
I need you to tell me
if I've done a bad thing.
Bortus.
Klyden. How was your game?
We did not play. Topa
never arrived.
That is odd.
He has never missed
a Grand Latchkum.
-(comm chirps)
-Inquiry.
What is Topa's location?
COMPUTER: Topa is currently
in crew quarters.
Topa. Where have you been?
I waited for you in
the simulator.
Are you all right?
Was I born female?
-Topa...
-Answer me.
How could you possibly
ask such a thing?
Answer me.
Of course not!
Where...
where did you get that?
Does it matter?
Was it Commander Grayson?
TOPA:
Tell me the truth.
Was I born female?
Yes.
(computer chirps)
Why did you not tell me?
It was for your
own well-being.
We wanted to protect you.
Were you ever going
to tell me?
We did not know.
It did not appear to
serve a purpose.
You have been lying to me.
My entire life has been a lie.
No!
Topa, you were born malformed,
it is true,
but the doctors made you well!
You are male now! That
is all that--
I may appear to be male...
but what is inside
me still exists.
It is why I have felt the way
I have for so long.
My body has been screaming to me
that I am someone else.
I am...
I am sorry.
KLYDEN: Topa.
To leave you as you were
would have been--
Unthinkable.
Yes.
Moclus has taught me,
you have taught me,
that to be female...
is an aberration of nature.
I have heard the lesson clearly.
Moclus is an imperfect
society. What is taught--
-Bortus, you cannot--
-Klyden, you will be silent!
We love you.
For everything that you are.
And were.
(sighs)
(banging on door)
Come in...
How dare you!
Is there something
I can do for you, Klyden?
If we were on Moclus,
I would be within my rights to
break your little neck.
Well, we're not on Moclus,
but you're welcome to try.
No? Then I suggest you back
the hell away from my desk.
My son is in emotional ruin
because of you.
I told him to have a slice of
Kimbok. That's all I said.
You gave him the password
for the trial records!
-No, I didn't.
-You are a liar!
I pointed him in the right
direction, yes, I admi--
Who are you to decide
what is best for my child?!
-Somebody has to!
-My son was content!
Your son was miserable!
You wrecked that kid the second
you walked into that courtroom,
so do not try to pin
this bullshit on me!
I remember when we were
in the Kandar system.
You were worshiped as a god
by the planet's inhabitants.
Perhaps you still believe
it yourself.
Perhaps that is why you chose
to play god with my family.
I played god?!
Klyden, that kid
has been crying out for help,
and you've been burying
your fat head in the sand
because the truth doesn't fit in
with your backward worldview!
Now, I may have overstepped,
but somebody needed
to start paying attention.
Because that child
is in trouble.
And no matter how much
it hurts you to know it,
underneath that manufactured
exterior,
Topa is still female.
I'm gonna use my imagination
and pretend that didn't
just happen.
Then I'm gonna let go,
and you're gonna get the
hell out of my office.
If you ever try to strike
an officer again,
I'm gonna break your
goddamn arm off
and mount it on my wall.
You hear me?
-(groans)
-Do you hear me?
Yes!
(door opens)
(closes)
(tranquil music playing)
(door chimes)
Come in.
Bortus...
I am sorry to intrude,
Commander.
No, please, come on in.
I require your help.
Of course.
Topa will not speak
to Klyden, or to me.
I know.
If it means anything,
Claire's been able
to talk to him.
It's a good sign, at least he's
opening up to someone.
It may just take some time.
Sit down, please.
Bortus...
I am so sorry I caused this.
I...
I just saw this kid in a place
of such despair, and...
I was only trying to help him.
But the fact is, I was
way out of line.
It wasn't my place.
You are not responsible.
I was the one
who led him to the Kimbok file.
I gave him the password.
What?
I was on the bridge.
Commander Keyali was occupied,
and I was monitoring the
security station.
There was an alert
that someone was attempting
to access a coded file.
I saw that it was Topa.
So...
I sent it to him.
You wanted him to know.
It...
happened in the moment.
It was not premeditated.
Have you told him?
No, no.
But I do not...
I do not know how to help him!
(gasps)
♪♪
How's the patient?
Well, the good news is,
I'm not worried about self-harm
at the moment.
Regardless of the
psychological upheaval
caused by this discovery,
I genuinely believe
you did the right thing.
I wish I had your confidence.
It was a reckless move.
Well, that's why
the most important thing
we can do right
now is listen.
Topa is going to have
to guide us.
Can I go in?
Hi.
You knew.
I wanted to tell
you a lot sooner. I just...
They're your parents.
I did as much as I dared.
I wish I did not know.
Oh, Topa...
I'm so sorry.
No.
No, I do not mean what I say.
I'm still here.
If you need someone to talk to,
day or night.
What do I do?
You're the only person
who can answer that.
But, however you choose
to process this...
I'm on your side.
I know many females.
But, they are all from
other worlds.
You... Commander Keyali...
Dr. Finn...
but no Moclans.
I wish...
I could meet a Moclan female.
But, my father would
never allow it.
Maybe he doesn't have to.
(beeping)
Access all audiovisual data
pertaining to file designation
Kimbok33.
Reference logs beginning
at time index 8490.5.
Integrate, and create
simulation.
-(chimes)
-COMPUTER: Simulation ready.
Begin simulation and hold.
(sentimental music playing)
Is that...
Heveena.
The writer the Moclans knew
as Gondus Elden,
before she revealed
she was female.
This is the courtroom
where your fate was decided.
♪♪
I read about her in
the Kimbok file.
But it did not describe
her appearance.
Her face appears so wise.
Wait till you hear her speak.
Resume simulation.
When I was born, long ago,
my parents made the choice
to allow me to remain female.
They believed that
to have me altered
would be an offense to nature.
So, they took me far up
into the mountains,
and built our family
a home in seclusion.
They taught me to think.
To read.
To wonder.
They taught me to love
the person I was.
When they passed, I remained.
I had planned to die up there.
Undiscovered.
But that is no longer possible.
The tribunal must not be allowed
to take from this child
the gift that I was given.
So, I present myself to you
as a woman without regret.
I am happy.
(dramatic music playing)
♪♪
(door opens)
Doctor.
What is it?
I am female.
This is preposterous!
Do you have any idea
what you are suggesting?!
Look, this kid has been
at the center
of a cultural cyclone
since the day she was born.
It's about time that
we all stop trying
to decide who she is,
shut the hell up, and
let her tell us.
He does not understand
what awaits him!
Really? You've been telling her
since she was a young child
that females are garbage.
She's well aware, Klyden.
Stop using that word!
And she's still
standing by her decision.
Seems like she's
pretty sure of what she wants.
Bortus. What do you think?
I believe...
that Commander Grayson
is correct.
Topa has the right to decide.
Bortus, have you
lost your mind?!
Claire, is this an issue
of personal identity alone,
or has Topa...?
Topa has asked me
to reverse the procedure, yes.
She wants her physical body
to represent its origins.
And obviously that's possible.
It is possible, yes.
And very simple.
You are a doctor!
You must realize that Topa
is too young
to make this decision!
Are you hearing yourself?
Seriously, are you
completely oblivious
to the hypocrisy of
what you just said?
He is an adolescent!
-She was a baby!
-Doctor.
Is there any psychological risk?
Under normal circumstances,
I couldn't do what's being asked
until the child reached
adulthood,
but, to be blunt, Topa's history
makes it all a wash.
It's impactful either way.
So, in my professional opinion,
the tipping factor
should be the wishes
of Topa herself.
And, there's a very reasonable
argument
that we'd simply be restoring
what was taken from her.
It is immoral, and
it is illegal!
On Moclus. We're
not on Moclus.
-I forbid it!
-It's not up to you.
-I am his father!
-And so is Bortus.
Where medical issues
are concerned,
Union law states that if a child
is not of legal age
to make the decision
on their own,
it requires the consent of
at least one parent or guardian.
Doesn't require both.
Bortus?
(sighs)
If you do this...
I will leave you.
I swear it.
And I will not even give you
the dignity of the sword.
Captain.
There is another factor
that we have not discussed.
I know.
Even with Bortus's consent,
it may not be that simple.
You should know that this is
not something we take lightly.
The Union council conferred
with the Admiralty
for no less than nine hours
on the subject.
But it is abundantly clear
that this would deeply imperil
our relationship with
the Moclans.
With the Krill treaty in ruins,
and the Kaylon waiting
at our doorstep,
we just can't take the risk.
Therefore, Dr. Finn,
it is my unhappy duty
to order you
not to perform this procedure.
What?
GRAYSON:
Excuse me, sir.
We have checked every legal box.
Topa has requested it.
Bortus has consented.
Everyone involved
is within their legal rights.
Civil law permits it,
you are correct.
But you're on a Fleet ship
with a Fleet doctor.
We can't allow it.
Sir, I understand
the danger, but...
how the hell much longer
are we going to let this go on?
I mean, you are basically
allowing the Moclans
to dictate human rights policy
for the Union.
I don't want this to drag on
any more than you do, Captain.
You don't think I hate
making this call?
But we're desperately trying
to save lives here.
Without the Moclans,
we become utterly vulnerable
to the Kaylon.
This procedure won't help Topa
if she's dead.
Can we speak to Rechik?
Rechik wanted to
be in this meeting
along with the two other
Moclan councilmen.
I told him no. Trust me,
I'm doing you a favor.
This issue is a lightning rod
for the Moclans.
The trial was a defining moment
that, to them,
reinforced their cultural
foundations.
I am telling you, I have been
doing this job a long time.
If we defy their custom
and invalidate that verdict
by allowing a Union
medical officer to do this,
the Moclans will be humiliated,
and trust me, they will walk,
and billions could
die as a result.
Would the Moclans
really want to cut ties,
and face the Kaylon alone?
Want is irrelevant.
They'd have no way to save face
if they didn't.
Admiral. You have children,
don't you?
Yes.
If Topa was your child,
how would you explain
this to her?
That we're forcing her to spend
the rest of her days
living a lie to protect
the political status quo?
If Topa wants to
leave the ship
and have the procedure
done elsewhere,
we have no jurisdiction.
She would not succeed.
The Moclans would pounce on her
without Union protection.
She'd be captured and sent to
prison in a heartbeat.
Captain, I empathize
with all of you.
Please believe me.
But our hands are tied.
I'm very sorry.
My God.
How are we going to tell her?
I will speak to Topa.
Commander, if it is not
too difficult...
I'll come too.
♪♪
It is not fair.
No. It is not.
Haven't they done enough?
When does it stop?
When do I get to decide
how to live my own life?
Never.
It will always be
decided for me.
By other people.
I hate this universe.
Topa. This isn't over.
We're going to keep fighting it.
-How?
-We'll find a way.
Do not bother.
If they insist that I am male,
then that is what I will be.
Topa...
May I go now?
-If there i--
-May I go?
Of course.
(expansive music playing)
Boy, you really did a number
on yourself, didn't you?
Yeah, I was just careless.
Good news is, we've covered
the last of the catacombs.
Okay, try standing up slowly.
Thing of beauty. Thanks, Doc.
Captain, we've hit the end
of the line down there.
It's all been mapped out
for the science team,
so there shouldn't
be any surprises.
I can have a detailed chart
to you by the end of the day.
Good work. You can prep the
shuttle for departure.
Aye, sir.
Talla. What's the latest?
All cleared, sir.
We've de-fanged almost
every booby trap in the place.
There are a few we can't get to
without damaging the
architecture,
but I'm working with Charly
to place markers on the map.
All right, start rounding
up the team.
Sir, if I can ask...
how's Topa?
Not good.
Will you tell her that
the entire crew
is pulling for her?
Captain... I had a thought.
What is it?
What if...
What if I resigned
my commission?
Admiral Howland says
that a Fleet medical officer
can't do the procedure.
Fine.
Then I won't be a Fleet officer.
I'll be a civilian doctor.
Claire, that's...
very noble.
But you've dedicated
your entire career to the Fleet.
It's not like you can do that
and just jump right back in.
Your professional life
as you know it would be over.
Not to mention, you'd probably
become a target for the Moclans.
But it would give the Admirals
plausible deniability.
Technically.
And the Moclans could
remain in the Union
and still save face.
Again, technically.
It may be enough.
Look...
this would have to be
entirely your decision.
Every member of the crew
would have to be able
to claim honestly,
under oath,
that they did not aid or witness
the procedure.
Claire. Are you sure
you really want to do this?
You'd be saying goodbye
to the Orville.
We're talking about
Topa's life.
I think it's a fair trade.
So I won't be a Union officer.
I'll be okay.
ISAAC:
Excuse me, Doctor.
I am not a Union officer.
What?
ISAAC:
I have never been commissioned.
I came to the Orville
as an emissary.
That designation has
never been altered.
What are you getting at?
ISAAC:
I could perform the procedure.
You?
ISAAC:
I am quite capable.
All required medical data
is available from the
ship's computer.
I could upload it to
my core memory,
along with any additional
specifications
you may wish to include.
Isaac, you're... not a doctor.
ISAAC: I am an artificial
life form
capable of executing
complex algorithms
demanding extreme physical
dexterity.
For me, there is no difference
between performing surgery,
playing a piano concerto,
or re-aligning a scanner array.
In effect, I can indeed
be... a doctor.
Claire?
He's right.
Isaac.
I am officially ordering you
not to interfere.
Which means if you did this,
you would be doing
it on your own.
Without my knowledge,
and without the knowledge of any
crew member aboard the Orville.
ISAAC:
I understand, sir.
It would be...
unfortunate if a member
of the crew visited sickbay
during that hypothetical window.
I've got an idea.
(upbeat music playing)
-(comm chirps)
-All hands, this is the captain.
I'm pleased to inform
you there will be
a very special performance
this evening in the shuttle bay.
As many of you are aware,
our second officer,
Commander Bortus,
also happens to be a
very gifted singer.
He has not thus far graced us
with his talents,
but tonight at 2100 hours,
he will be performing
selections from
the musical repertoires of
16 different Union planets.
If you'd care to attend,
please submit a notification to
Commander Keyali.
Damn. You're a hot
ticket, Bortus.
I will be sure to bring my,
what does Lieutenant Malloy
call it?
My "A" game.
There ya go, buddy.
Looks to me like
we may have a full house.
(upbeat music playing)
(indistinct chatter)
(music ends)
(crowd murmuring)
(applause)
Thank you.
This song was taught
to me by Dr. Finn.
She says it is one
of her favorites.
(playing tranquil
introduction)
That key is too high!
Sorry.
(singing)
♪ There was a boy ♪
♪ A very strange
enchanted boy ♪
♪ They say he wandered
very far ♪
♪ Very far ♪
♪ Over land and sea ♪
♪ A little shy ♪
♪ And sad of eye ♪
♪ But very wise ♪
♪ Was he ♪
♪ And then one day ♪
♪ A magic day he
passed my way ♪
♪ And while we spoke
of many things ♪
♪ Fools and kings... ♪
ISAAC: Topa.
Please come with me.
-Why?
-ISAAC: I am here to help.
Please disrobe
and recline on the medical bed.
I'm...
ISAAC:
Is there some difficulty?
Isaac, I'm...
I'm afraid.
ISAAC: Do you wish to abstain
from the procedure?
No. I want it.
But...
are you sure I will
be all right?
ISAAC:
I am quite certain.
Our time is finite.
Please disrobe.
I wish Dr. Finn was here.
ISAAC: Dr. Finn is unable
to perform the procedure.
Maybe...
I would not be so nervous.
ISAAC: You are referring to what
Dr. Finn calls
a "bedside manner."
I will make sure that
you are safe.
You do not need to be afraid.
Topa! What are you doing?!
-Papa...
-You will come with me at once!
Get out of my way, Kaylon.
ISAAC: I am afraid that will
not be possible.
I will not permit you to
disrupt the procedure.
I forbid you to do this!
You will destroy him!
ISAAC:
That is inaccurate.
He will be altered physically,
but he will remain a fully
functioning
biological organism.
He will be a monstrosity!
ISAAC:
That is also inaccurate.
I surmise your capacity
to reason
has been compromised by
your cultural indoctrination.
This is to be expected.
Please depart.
(Klyden straining)
(grunts)
(groans)
(heavy breaths)
Are you ready to begin?
(deep breath)
(console beeping)
(singing)
♪ Walk on, walk on ♪
♪ With hope ♪
♪ In your heart ♪
♪ And you'll never ♪
♪ Walk ♪
♪ Alone ♪
♪ You'll never ♪
♪ Walk ♪
♪ Alone ♪
(mystical music playing)
(serene music playing)
♪♪
The USS Newton has assumed
synchronous orbit, Captain.
Science teams are
requesting permission
to begin offloading
the artifacts.
-Permission granted.
-(comm beeps)
Captain, I'm receiving a message
from Admiral Howland.
She's arrived aboard the Newton.
She'd like to meet with you and
Commander Grayson
in your office.
Do you have difficulty
understanding
simple speech, Captain?
No, sir.
-Do you, Commander?
-No, sir.
Yet, for some
completely mystifying reason,
my crystal-clear orders
were blatantly disobeyed.
I take full responsibility--
You will speak when
spoken to, Captain,
do you understand me?!
Yes, sir, Admiral.
You seem to think that your
personal judgment is more sound
than the judgment
of the entire Union Council.
That is a staggeringly arrogant
point of view, wouldn't you say?
-Yes, sir.
-What's that?
Yes, sir!
You ignored a decision
handed down by your superiors
and committed an act
of outright disobedience,
thereby jeopardizing an alliance
that is one of our only barriers
against annihilation
from an outside force!
We were unaware the procedure
was occurring, sir.
Well, then that makes
you insubordinate
and incompetent, doesn't it?
Yes, sir, it does.
The Moclans are
understandably furious
about this flagrant disregard
for their culture.
However, they've decided
that the time is not right
to withdraw their
Union membership.
In addition, the fact that a
Kaylon performed the procedure
has further heightened
their resolve to restrain
and vanquish the Kaylon threat.
Some would say that makes
your actions commendable.
Well, I say you just got lucky.
And if either of you ever again
step out of line,
and I mean so much as a wrinkle
in your uniform,
or a blemish on your shoes,
you are finished!
Do I make myself clear?
BOTH: Yes, sir.
(sighs)
Please, extend my best wishes
to the Moclan girl.
Klyden. You do not
have to do this.
Papa. I had to.
I could not live my life
the way you wanted me to.
It would have been a lie.
Have you no room in your heart
for tolerance?
What inner fulfillment
are you enjoying
from this devotion to tradition,
that is so potent
it drives you from your family?
TOPA: Papa.
I love you.
I wish you were never born.
(door opens)
(door closes)
Listen very closely to me.
You are perfect.
-Hi.
-ISAAC: Hello, Doctor.
You've been pretty
reclusive lately.
ISAAC: Since the Hemblicite
artifacts
have been offloaded
to the Newton,
I have had the opportunity
to analyze the accumulated data
in more detail.
It is quite illuminating.
You know, uh...
you did a good thing, Isaac.
ISAAC:
I am aware of that.
Topa's very grateful.
Maybe that means something
to you?
ISAAC:
It does not.
(slight chuckle) Of course.
ISAAC: I did not perform
the procedure
for Topa's benefit.
You...
I-I don't understand.
ISAAC: We are both aware
that my presence on the ship
is a disruptive element.
The crew is not fond of me.
This is understandable.
Given their affection for Topa,
I reasoned that by
assisting her,
I could improve my standing
aboard the Orville.
This would increase
crew efficiency
on occasions during which
they must interact with me.
And maybe they'd like
you a little more.
ISAAC:
That is also possible.
Isaac...
you are the most honest
man I know.
You want to have dinner?
ISAAC:
Very well, Doctor.
(inspirational music playing)
-(comm beeps)
-GRAYSON: Grayson to Topa.
-Yes, Commander?
GRAYSON:
We're about to leave orbit.
I was wondering if you'd like
to sit in the command chair
for departure.
I... would like that, yes.
GRAYSON: Report to the bridge
on the double.
Yes, sir.
(orchestra playing
"You'll Never Walk Alone")
Have a seat, Captain.
All departments
show green, sir.
Course plotted and laid in.
Ready for departure.
On your order, sir.
Engage quantum drive.
(music swelling)
(theme song playing)
Captioned by Point.360